Add switch expression to language reference (#17512)
dotnet/docs: docs/csharp/language-reference/operators/switch.md

---

> title: "switch expressions - C# reference"

Reviewer: All other articles are in single. "default value expressions" is an exception because there are two kinds of that.
```suggestion
title: "switch expression - C# reference"
```

description: Learn how to use the C# switch expression for pattern matching and other data introspection
ms.date: 03/19/2020
---

> # switch expressions (C# reference)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# switch expression (C# reference)
```

This article covers the `switch` expression, introduced in C# 8.0. For information on the `switch` statement, see the article on the [`switch` statement](../statements/switch.md) in the [statements](../statements/index.md) section.

## Basic example

The `switch` expression provides for `switch`-like semantics in an expression context. It provides a concise syntax when the switch arms produce a value. The following example shows the structure of a switch expression. It translates values from an `enum` representing visual directions in an online map to the corresponding cardinal direction:

> :::code language="csharp" source="snippets/SwitchExpressions.cs" id="SnippetBasicStructure" interactive="csharp-interactive":::

Reviewer: Is it the new interactive system in action? The snippet doesn't include `enum` definitions, but will be runnable anyway?

Author: The new system is deployed. I'm making all the snippets in this article non-interactive because the new system uses scriptcs, which doesn't have full fidelity with C# 8.0 features.

The preceding sample shows the basic elements of a switch expression:

> - The *range expression*: The preceding example uses the variable `direction` as the range expression.

Reviewer: Is it a widely-used name: *range expression*? It has several meanings: I would call `1..^1` also a range expression. If we consider `switch` as operator, then it's *argument expression*.

Author: That's a good point. Right now, that's the term used in the [recursive patterns spec](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/proposals/csharp-8.0/patterns)  for the grammar.

I think this may change. The spec currently uses the term "switch-expression" for the same concept in the `switch` statement.

For now though, this is consistent.

- The *switch expression arms*: Each switch expression arm contains a *pattern*, an optional *case guard*, the `=>` token, and an *expression*.

The result of the *switch expression* is the value of the expression of the first *switch expression arm* whose *pattern* matches the *range expression* and whose *cause guard*, if present, evaluates to `true`. The *expression* on the right of the `=>` token can't be an expression statement.

> Each *switch expression arm* is evaluated in text order. The compiler issues an error when later switch expression arms can't be chosen because an earlier *switch expression arm* matches all its values.

Reviewer: Now, it reads as an individual expression arm is evaluated from left to right, but I guess the intention is to say "from top to bottom":
```suggestion
The *switch expression arms* are evaluated in text order. The compiler issues an error when a lower *switch expression arm* can't be chosen because a higher *switch expression arm* matches all its values.
```

> ## Patterns and case guards

Reviewer: My following thoughts are definitely not something to act upon in this PR. I'm interested in how the pattern matching info is going to be consolidated in future.

In general, I observe some amount of duplication in the docs about patterns. Is that intentional? I wonder: are the patterns in this section unique to the `switch` expression? I guess one might use them with the `switch` statement or even with `is`. Ideally, it can be beneficial to have only one reference article that describes all available patterns (maybe in the order of introduction to the language). Then, the articles about `is`, `switch` (both statement and expression) would link that article.

Author: I agree with those thoughts. We're working on planning for major updates in time for .NET 5.0, and this is one of the topics being discussed. I'm hoping to have an issue and project for public discussion in the next few weeks.

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/SwitchExpressions.cs" id="SnippetTypePattern":::

Patterns can be recursive, where a pattern tests a type, and if that type matches, the pattern matches one or more property values on the range expression. You can use recursive patterns to extend the preceding example. You add switch expression arms for arrays that have fewer than 3 elements. Recursive patterns are shown in the following example:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/SwitchExpressions.cs" id="SnippetRecursivePattern":::

Recursive patterns can examine properties of the range expression, but can't execute arbitrary code. You can use a *case guard*, specified in a `when` clause, to provide similar checks for other sequence types:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/SwitchExpressions.cs" id="SnippetGuardCase":::

Finally, you can add the `_` pattern and the `null` pattern to catch arguments that aren't processed by any other switch expression arm. That makes the switch expression *exhaustive*, meaning any possible value of the range expression is handled. The following example adds those expression arms:

> :::code language="csharp" source="snippets/SwitchExpressions.cs" id="SnippetExhaustive" interactive="csharp-interactive":::

Reviewer: The corresponding snippet doesn't look to be interactive.

> The preceding example adds a `null` pattern, and changes the `IEnumerable<T>` type pattern to a `_` pattern. The `null` pattern provides a null check as a switch expression arm. The expression for that arm throws a null argument exception. The `_` pattern matches all inputs that haven't been matched by a previous arm. It must come after the `null` check, or it would match `null` inputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The preceding example adds a `null` pattern, and changes the `IEnumerable<T>` type pattern to a `_` pattern. The `null` pattern provides a null check as a switch expression arm. The expression for that arm throws an <xref:System.ArgumentNullException>. The `_` pattern matches all inputs that haven't been matched by previous arms. It must come after the `null` check, or it would match `null` inputs.
```

> 

Reviewer: Is there a language spec proposal available to link (instead of the C# language reference)?

Author: I added a link to the recursive patterns spec.

## See also

- [C# reference](../index.md)

> - [C# expressions and operators](index.md)

Reviewer: That article is still named "C# operators" and talks about operators only:
```suggestion
- [C# operators](index.md)
```
(I'm planning to move the material about expressions from the programming guide to that article; then, I would rename the article.)
